General, Brigadier General Johnson, today is
July 14, 1981. Let's start about, start talking
about your upbringing. Can you tell us where,
where and when you were born? Yeah, I was born in
Houston, Texas, May the 2nd, 1921. Okay, can you
tell me about your parents, their occupations or
backgrounds?
Well, my dad, uh, At the time that I was born, I
was working for the city of Houston as a health
officer. However, he had been a machinist in the
Southern Pacific Roundhouse in Houston. At the
time, one of Houston's most popular Mayor Oscar
Holcomb ran for office the first time, and dad
helped carry the roundhouse, which was a
considerable vote. And as such, the mayor carried
him over to the city, and dad worked for the city off
and on while Holcomb was mayor and under a couple of
other mayors. My mother is a pretty well-educated
lady, and
though she was principally a housewife and
mother,
she did substitute school teaching. I have one
brother. He's four years younger than I, and he too
is a graduate of Texas A&M. What type of education
did your father have? My father had only a high
school education. He was a enlisted man in World
War I. Got all the way to the rank of corporal.
We lived in a middle class neighborhood.
I went to private school through the second or
third grade and then entered public school. As
such, I guess it was a year ahead
of in school of most children my age.
So much so that I was 16 years old in May and I entered
A&M. At 16? At 16, yes.
Which incidentally, I was the second youngest in
our class.
Come to bear later on. Did your mother go to
college? She went to college, but did not
graduate. Do you remember where she went? No, I
don't. Coincidentally, she and I went to the same
high school in Houston, Texas. Same building,
same location. What type of student were you in
high school? In high school, I was probably a good
student. Nowhere making all A's or anything like
that. Strong
enough that The only courses that gave me any
trouble were Spanish. At that time, Spanish was a
two-year requirement. I remember having to
repeat one semester of Spanish.
I had strength enough to be company commander of a
junior ROTC unit at the high school. We had three
companies, so we had our own battalion. I was one of
the three company commanders. So you became
involved in the military early then in life. Yes,
yes. I knew from real early in life that the two
things that I was interested in doing, that was
building and being in the military. Why did you
know that? How could you tell? Well,
as...
Looking back,
we had an ideal, what you might call, miniature
battlefield between our garage and the garage
next door to us. Incidentally, I was born in my
house that I lived in, not in
a hospital. We had just a large space. We were
constantly using miniature soldiers and tanks
and things like that and playing war games. And I
was always the one that was doing the building and
the excavation
and laying supposedly the mine fields and things
like that. And that's just not something that we do
every now and then. all but just a constant game.
And when the day was over, we would quietly leave
everything where it was and just take a little
break. And this was one of our favorite pastimes as
we were growing up.
I was always stringing off things,
getting things ready in our own imagination to be
built and things like that. I didn't call it an
argument or a flash or anything like that with my
father because he had grandiose ideas that I was
going to be a patrol engineer and I knew damn good I
was going to be a civil engineer. Sooner or later, I
guess I won out, but it cost maybe
a couple of years of career or something like that,
having to do the things that he wanted me to do. Was
he ever involved in the military? Oh, you said he
was during the World War. Just during the World
War. But did he remain in the reserves or anything
like that? No. So he didn't come from a military
background, yet you knew at an early age that you
wanted to be in the military. How can you explain
that? I don't know, because I even had employment
to West Point and couldn't pass physical for West
Point, so... I chose other
routes of getting to where I got.
There was a program. It's called the Citizens
Military Training Camps. I don't know whether
you've ever been exposed to them or not, but which
right here in San Antonio in Camp Bullitt. out
north of town here. It's one of the locations that
young men from all over this part of the country
would come each summer and train and study. And it
was a four-year process called the basic red,
white, and blue. And after the four years and the
completion of what was known as the 10 series
course, by correspondence, he would then be
commissioned as second lieutenant.
The three years of ROTC in high school could be
substituted for the basic, and I finished the red
course and the white course and was prepared to go
back to the blue, but I attained a contract for
advanced military training at A&M There was no
requirement to go back to next year, but I could go
back any time, so I kind of figured I'll take the
contract through Senior ROTC and head the
commission that way. But I made up my mind I was
going to be a commission officer. outstanding
Captain of the Artillery Commandant when I was in
high school that took a personal interest in his
cadet officers. What was his name? His name was
Paul Van Tuyl, V-A-N-T-U-Y-L.
He was a second father to each of the cadet
officers, and we could turn to him for counseling,
anything, anything about life that we wanted to
talk about. I'm sure that he had an effect. Let's
get back to your parents for a minute. What type
of... character with your father and your mother
my father and mother are still living and he is a
character
my father was the first born generation of danish
stock the johnson comes from denmark my
grandfather came from denmark when he was 17 years
old
Where and how he met my grandmother, I don't know.
Who was Otis, O-T-I-S? She was a third generation
away from James Otis, the revolutionary writer.
No kidding. Yes. That's where the O comes from,
Otis in my name. They came down after he entered the
country in New England. They came down to East
Texas, and Grandpa went into the lumber business.
My dad had
three
brothers and one sister. They lived in the
Groveton Huntsville area and did lumber over
there in the Piney Woods.
He, I don't guess he and I are too much different,
because there is truth in the saying, a part head
gains, because when he gets pretty well set in his
ways, he's kind of difficult. He has
done all that he could with
Everything that he had to work with to raise the
family and provide us with a good life. So he was a
hard working guy? Oh yes, very. The fact is, even to
this day, he's now a hybridizer of Hemerichalis.
That's a daylily hybridizer. He actually breeds
them, names them. grows them professionally, and
works the garden himself. Not in the best of
physical conditions, but that's his life. When he
gets into something, he's into it all the way.
Looking back, we all know that Jerry made
mistakes. He made two races, two attempts. to
become state railroad
commissioner. At the time, my brother and I were
young. There was no way that we could, and probably
didn't even realize it at the time, but looking
back, he didn't have the qualifications to become
state railroad commissioner. But he thought he
did, and it cost a hell of a lot of money to become
state commissioner. And that probably set us back
financially, My brother's living comfortably,
and my mother and father are living comfortably. I
guess we've made it through. I want to stop here.
Okay, now can you sort of characterize your
mother?
Yeah, my mother, I'd have to say, is the
is really the strength in the center of the family.
She's the one that has probably
done more for both my brother and me, has
been the point around which the family grew up.
whenever there were real problems. Really, I
guess Mother was the one that
seemed to pull everything together. And
my mother,
well, I can't say that she alone. Both of them were
quite active in Parent Teachers Association,
both at my school and my brother's school. But in
spite of the fact that we had no sisters, my mother
became the volunteer head of the Girl Scouts in the
Houston area. She was the top volunteer woman. She
great in service, social work, and I'm sure that I
picked that up from her rather than from my father.
My father was a hard worker and a man always trying
to make money. I don't mean greedy or selfish, but
that was his, realizing his shortcomings, he was
going to make it one way or the other.
And again, as they both are growing old there,
she's the She's the mainstay of the two of them. Who
is the authority in the household now? Well, I
don't think there is one right now. I'd say Mother
was. Dad often thought he was, but I think Mother
had trouble
with him. Was religion an important influence? It
was to a degree, and it's interesting that you
bring it up because I don't know how well you know
Houston, but
there's some things that I don't know to precise
dates and things like that. Their acquaintances
and courtships took place
in Bell County, which is in a little community
called Holland. And I don't know what
happened or how it moved from Holland to the
Houston Heights, which is out on Heights
Boulevard, Washington Avenue, out in that area.
And yet, when I was born and We grew up, we lived all
the way across town on the east side, out in
Eastwood. But every Sunday, we'd go back to the
Presbyterian Church out in the Heights. Well,
this took place until, oh, about the time, I guess,
I was in the fifth, sixth, or seventh grade,
something like that. And all of the friends that I
had there in our neighborhood were going to an
Episcopal church that was just about two blocks
from where we lived. And I guess I was the first one
to balk. And I said, well, you all go on to the
Heights, but I'm going to go over here where all of
my friends are going to Sunday school and church.
And
didn't seem to have any problem. I was permitted to
do it. And
I was confirmed in the Episcopal Church. As a
result of my going, my brother became confirmed in
the Episcopal Church. My mother then switched
over to the Episcopal Church. From what? From
Presbyterian. Where they were all going out on a
hike. And later my father did. My wife, when I
married her, was Methodist. She's now Episcopal.
My brother's first wife went to the Episcopal
Church. I mean, joined the Episcopal Church. And
so we just made a swing from the Presbyterian to the
Episcopal Church. And yes, It played a great deal.
I
was,
as I grew up, I was about, you have to compare me to a
matchstick, all the way through school, even when
I came out of A&M. When I came out of A&M, I was six
foot two and a half. I weighed 139 pounds. And I was
that way all the way through school. Well, in
junior high school, I could play basketball. But
when I reached high school, I was out of my league.
But we had a preacher at this Episcopal church that
made up his mind that he was going to draw the young
people to the church. And he had all types of
programs. And one of the programs was a sports
program. We had basketball teams, and we had
tackle football teams, and we had complete full
uniforms and so on. The fact is, the worst football
game that I ever played, playing for that church,
and we were known as the Eastwood Green, was
against the University of Houston. The church
played the University of Houston. Now this was
back when the University of Houston was a junior
college in downtown Houston up on the second or
third floor of a building before it became what it
is now. But again, lightweight as I was, that guy on
the other side was about 185 pounds. And it took two
of us to move him every once in a while. But yes, both
because of this... Gordon Reese was the
preacher's name. Reverend Reese's interest in
the youth and the programs that he had to attract us
to the church, it was quite important. I have later
in life, they come out, I served as a vesterman on
the Bishop's Committee, what the Episcopal
Church calls the committee that runs a mission
that's not yet a full church. I've been a lay
reader.
It means an awful lot. I am a member of the Episcopal
Church here in Winthrop.
My dad and mother are still members. I don't know
whether my brother
is or not. You've had a successful career. In what
way would you credit your parents for that?
Well, I don't know. limited it to words.
My father, as
Bud and I were growing up, insisted that we realize
that
every man, and I use that collectively for Van
Allen, every man is good. until the first time he
does wrong. And then if he does you wrong the second
time, that's your fault. And you've got to accept
people on that basis. Everybody's good. The
second time, it's your fault. And my mother taught
us way back in the beginning
If you ever decide that you're going to steal,
steal real, real big. Don't steal little. Steal
big. And I think that hit both my butt and me, and
just, you know, every time temptation might come
your way, you think, hey, I didn't think about it.
And she explained it, but that was what she was
trying to do. And my brother had had a very
successful life. He had been assistant high
school principal in Houston. In fact, he was
assistant principal of the first high school that
was integrated in Houston. He, too, is an Air
Force.
Reserve, retired colonel. He's waiting for aid
before he can start growing benefits. He retired
as a retired colonel. But he's a farmer for Potato
Shrine in Houston, which is a very big job in the
Messiah
Corps.
The associations that I've had with my parents, of
course, began to be limited after I was 16 and went
off to school. Because I was in that baby class at
41. And though I was only 20 years old, they
commissioned me, and pow, we were gone. And I did
come back and got out of the service. I had five or
six years. close association because we both
lived in Houston and then piled back in the service
and gone again. So I guess really anything that I
received or from them came about in the first 16
years of life. What kind of a student were you in
high school? In high school? You said you were an
average student, but were you better in the
engineering or the math courses? Were those your
favorite subjects? Well, in high school, math was
my favorite subject.
Physics.
Any time that a course was based on pure memory, I'd
have problems.
I just found it very, very difficult to put courses
to memory. Jumping even at college, for instance,
I took the two semesters of freshman chemistry,
five semesters before I managed to get by. Because
I could find no way to take chemistry back to
reading or math. I mean, it was either a memory
course or it wasn't. Again, we're way out, way
ahead. But when I pursued my master's degree and
had to take a course in geology, I was back to a
memory course. There was no way to take
mathematics and tie it to any type of reasoning. It
was just a plain old memory course. There I was at
that time. I was a major. I think I managed to make a C
out of Jolly.
Were you interested in a number of organizations
or any organizations during those years in high
school? Yeah, I'd always, I've been since, well,
back my age, you couldn't go into the Boy Scouts
until 12 years old, and we didn't have such a thing
as a cup. And I went into the Boy Scouts and got
to be a Star Scout, I guess, before going
off to
college. But the managed to Stay busy and stay out
of trouble by the program that they had at the
church, the Boy Scout program. I sold papers on
Saturday night. I didn't have a regular paper
route.
It's something that's not done anymore in the
community. The Houston Post and the Houston
Chronicle both were coming out on Sunday night. I
mean, Saturday night. It's a Sunday paper. And
we'd pedal the bikes up and down the streets and
call in the paper and sell them. Then on Sunday
mornings, I threw two freebie routes that I had to
ride about six or eight miles from home to even
start those routes. I mean, they were that far.
No other particular organization. I didn't
belong to the highway. I didn't belong to the Y. Did
you consider yourself popular or well-liked in
high school?
Yes, I think so. Probably more so in high school
than in elementary school. Where I went to school,
we had the first five grades in elementary, and
then six, seven, eight in junior high school, and
then nine, ten, eleven in high school.
And in the eighth grade,
I started going with a girl, and we went with each
other all the way through high school. end of my
freshman year in college before we ever broke up
and
we were always in a small group of people but that
small group would in turn be in larger groups but we
had pretty much our own small group the fact is in
high school there were four of us that called
ourselves the 4-h's Harold, Hub, Morris, and then
we had to really reach for the other one, and we
reached for his last name, and it was Haberly. All
four of us ended up going into the military.
Harold Lewis is deceased now. He was in the Army.
Haberly.
Retired as a full colonel in the Marines and is
living in the Washington area. I don't know where
Horace is. Probably somewhere around Huntsville
or a girl from East Texas, something like that. But
we were just constantly together, all four of us.
were in junior rotc and three of us were cadet
captains and that just pretty much made our little
group you know but uh we weren't ostracized i don't
guess we ever really stopped to think are we well
like you know What about leadership? I'm always
interested when I talk to generals about
developing, when did leadership develop? About
what age? Some people, it starts very early. They
start taking sort of leadership roles in school or
at A&M. And then other people, it's not until
they're in their 20s. When did you think you
started to become
a leader? Well, let's see.
Looking back, I'd have to probably say that
somewhere in the 10th grade, because it was then
that they started narrowing down to determine who
were going to be the company commanders the year
following in high school.
Though
I'm always one to immediately, and A&M as we'll get
to somewhere down the line.
Drill field marketing and command to me is not
necessarily leadership, but it's part, I mean,
it's an outward sign or display of what a guy's
willing to do. But we hadn't
We had some things in our school that made it very
difficult to be a company commander of ROTC.
First, we had no campus. We were a masonry building
built in a U-shape with an asphalt court in
downtown Houston. And in order to perfect close
order drill, we actually had to leave the block or
the campus and go some eight or 10 blocks away into a
neighborhood that was sparsely populated and
then actually drill on the city streets where
there was very little, no traffic. And that was
completely in the hands of the cadet company
commander to get them out there and get them back on
time and be sure he got them all back And we were
drilling with rifles, I mean, on the street. And
then each year, the various companies competed,
even though we had three companies at Sam Houston.
All of the companies in the Houston area would
compete in close-order competition at small
diamonds. Buffalo Stadium, which was a
professional ball club in Houston, which was the
best drill company in Houston, and so on.
A lot of assistance is required of junior officers
and non-commissioned officers. Even in a
situation like that, just coping with a problem of
not being able to drill right, you know, get the
rifles and go 100 yards outside and start
drilling.
The old man was around. Ventile was around every
once in a while, but he wasn't standing over you the
whole time to see that you did it right. ready to
bark at you if you did it wrong. You have enough
faith. When did they start this program? Do you
remember? This high school military program? Oh,
I don't know. Of course, it's going on now, but I
don't know when it started. It had been going on,
oh, I don't know, six or eight
years before I was here. So it was probably
developed sometime in the 30s? I wouldn't think
so. But I don't know. And I think you'd only find it
in the larger public schools because
it was a financial burden that a small school
system really couldn't maintain. This
particular captain also taught physics at our
high school so that he had both the military and
physics. But then over the city, there was a
full-time major, and he ultimately was promoted
to lieutenant colonel. He was on active duty. He
was an army officer. And he had three or four
sergeants that he had to work for him. Because at
the end of the year, we'd have to carry in all the
arms out to certain locations so that they weren't
stored in the high schools during the summer time.
They were all stored in an armory. I don't know when
it started. Now, tell me about your attempt to get
into West Point. Was that your primary objective
when you graduated from high school? Well, My
primary objective was to become a commission
officer.
The attempt to get into West Point
was one made knowing good and well that I couldn't
do it because when I was six years old, five or six
years old, a neighbor boy picked up a piece of
asbestos roofing slate and sailed it across the
yard and picked me up here. And it knocked... Right
above the eye. Yeah. And it knocked the left lens
over partially behind my nose. And it reduced my
sight to 2060. Mm-hmm. And... Actually, it's 2200
correctable to 2060. And...
I knew that the chances of getting into West Point
were slim. But nevertheless, one of the Texas
senators offered the appointment. And I went to
the doc and took the physical. And of course,
there's no way of doing it. So OK, we're not going to
do it at West Point. We're going to do it some other
way. And physical restrictions and the reserve
program have never been what they are to one of the
academies. I know because my older son couldn't
pass the one to get in the Air Force Academy and he's
now a regular Air Force Major.
Was your primary aim then to become an engineer
then? Had you made that decision? Well, I'd have to
say my primary aim was to become a commissioned
officer. My secondary was to become an engineer.
Okay, and that's why you decided to go to A&M?
That's right. Okay, before we get to A&M, then,
let's talk about the Great Depression. In what way
did that have an impact? The what? The Depression
of the 1930s. In what way did that have an impact on
you or your family? Oh.
I guess... The impact that it had was, of course, at
A&M. I worked at something at A&M the whole time I
was there. For example? Well,
the head of the publicity department at Texas A&M
G. Byron Winstead. Byron's mother lived three
doors from our house where I was born and where I was
reared. And from the day I entered school, I worked
in the publishing department,
flipping, typing. So I typed then with two
fingers. I now use two fingers and two thumbs, and I
can probably get up to 60, 65 words a minute,
something like that. But that's the way many
people learn to type and still type.
The fact is I was on, what do you call it, the team
that helped make John Kimbrough All-American.
Because, sure, the guy makes it on the football
field, but if he had got the publicity department
behind him that's pushing the statistics and
pushing the stories and everything else, you
know, everything kind of falls in the cracks. But
that was a paying job. Well, see, we're at A&M now,
back up and forth. My junior year, I was a... Junior
sports editor, which was the assistant sports
editor. It's a paying job, or it was on the
battalion. At that time, the battalion was three
times a week. I don't know what it is now. Probably
daily now. We were three times a week. My senior
year, I was the sports editor.
My roommate and I had
each had a cleaning and pressing concession
within our organization. So any way that we could
make a buck, we would make a buck.
The summer of
either the summer of 40 or the summer of 39,
Another
cadet who I give an awful lot of credit to, what I
learned and where I went and what all I've done, by
the name of E.C.G. Boats, he was also in the sports
racket like I was in. O-A-T-S?
O-A-T-E-S, E.C.G. Boats. I'll look him up in the
directory in there.
He and I washed every window on A&M campus, except
the dormitories, inside and out. Two people
couldn't do that now. But back in that day and time,
but it took us half the summer to do it. But that was
our job. We were employed to do it. How much did you
make, a quarter and a half? Whatever the student
wage was. I'm thankful to have it because, you
know, I doubt that it was probably not much more
than that, you know. I attended summer school a
couple of summers. During the summers, I worked as
a table waiter. I did not work as a table waiter
during the record years because I couldn't do that
and do the newspaper work also. The newspaper work
even took me away from the campus. You were in
California? Oh, yeah. When A&M played UCLA in
1940, I went out with a team. That was out on the
train. As a sports editor? Yeah. I bet you that was a
great experience. Oh, it was terrific. Was that
the first time you ever left Texas? Yeah, it
probably was. Dean E.J. Kyle was the dean of
agriculture and the head of athletics for A&M. He
was whatever that ruling committee is. A
fellow by the name of Angel was the faculty advisor
to the battalion, and Angel will come up later on in
my military life. And the two of them said, why
shouldn't we take the sports editor with us? Well,
there we went. That was quite a thing to go out, stay
in the Hollywood Roosevelt, cover the game from
the press box out there. Just represent A&M, train
come back. What did you think? What did you think of
California? Oh, I thought it was everything that
everybody else did.
Fantastic. We had a good one with Mary Martin.
Let's draw off the record on that. Well, you can
edit anything out if you want. Kimbrough had shin
splints. And the coach was keeping him under rapid
key, and I thought that was the last thing we
wanted, was to let UCLA know that something was
wrong with his legs, because that's the first
thing they'd go for, you know, to try to get him out
of the game. Mary Barton, a good old Texas gal,
well, they brought her up to the hotel to make some
publicity shots and said, now, Mary, we're going
to give you a thermometer, and we want you to take
John's temperature. And Mary says, what did I do?
Put it in his mouth? John said, Mary, have you ever
taken a cow temperature? She said, no. And he said,
well, stick it in my mouth. Stick it in my mouth. He
was just disgusted as hell.
No, back to the Depression. Dad and Mom managed to
keep the college bills paid. And then it was up to me
to make the rest of it. Spending money, that
was up to me. What political persuasion was your
father? You said that he ran for office. Democrat.
And what type of Democrat? A liberal Democrat,
moderate, or conservative? Well, back in the old
days, I don't know. I wouldn't really say. He has,
since then... He was one conservative
Republican, and then he went back. I happen to know
that dad and mother both supported Carter when
Carter was elected president.
I guess one of the reasons the Depression didn't
really hurt us too much is this was one of the long
stretches that my dad worked for the city.
so he wasn't having to use his card as a machinist to
get a job and so on but
uh even at that time
i can remember many many meals when i was in high
school many many meatless needs